What are the research tasks?
If we talk about the research tasks that are solved by means of questionnaire surveys,
then the research tasks consist of understanding of information needs,
or the research tasks can be solved by understanding what information needs are determined in this form of marketing research.
For example, what is the likely demand for the supposed goods or services?
And here it is necessary to study the knowledge of people's attitude to the existing options of products or services,
the degree of awareness, for example, I know and use, or I know but do not use.
You feel the difference in these options of answers,
because if I know and use, it is typical consumer of services,
and I know but do not use, the next question should be,
why do not you use, and is it possible to transfer this non-consumer, but knowing about the services of the consumer,
the respondent to the category of consumers?
What segments will be more interested in such services?
Information needs, source of information, for example, where did you learn about the offer of goods or services,
or the factors that make the choice,
and also the degree of satisfaction with the existing product, either in general or with individual services,
and the intention to change.
And other research tasks, for example, what is the approximate percentage of use of these services, these segments,
and what are the characteristics?
We are now talking about an example in the form of paid medical services,
an example of the offer of paid medical services,
and conducting a questionnaire from the point of view of identifying information needs
and preferences, knowledge, and use of medical services of different medical centers among respondents.
Types of questionnaire questions have already been mentioned,
so here I will speak quickly enough.
There may be open or unstructured questions,
their advantage is in the variety of answers,
the disadvantages in the complexity of processing,
because the processing of open questions, where respondents are given the opportunity to answer questions independently,
as they want, without choosing answers,
and the complexity of processing is the same as in processing and analyzing high-quality information,
which is also unstructured.
Application. For example, you can use open questions as a part of a questionnaire.
What do you think about the brand, the company, its reputation, the brand?
When it is necessary to determine which aspects are important for the respondents,
for example, you can ask what will be the most important for you when choosing medical services.
Here the respondents are given the opportunity to answer the problem openly and, most importantly, unstructuredly,
that is, to answer from the point of view of their understanding of the problem.
The next type of questions is closed or structured questions,
which can be of two types, either dichotomous questions with only two possible answers,
yes-no, half-male, half-female,
and questions of the so-called multiple choice,
that is, they are sometimes called test questions,
when the respondents are given the opportunity to choose from several options of answers.
Sometimes such questions are semi-structured,
that is, in addition to the answers proposed by the researchers for such questions,
a line is offered, which is called another,
and the respondent is given the opportunity to express his or her own opinion very briefly in one line.
Usually, the categories of answers previously developed by the researchers are used.
The number of such categories, that is, options, answers, does not exceed 5-7,
but sometimes there is such an approach to assess the associations of the called brands,
to determine loyal consumers or to determine the importance of the range of these associations.
Such questions, categories of options, answers can be expanded to 10-20.
For example, such characteristics, which are usually included in the questionnaire for assessing,
I say again, associations associated with the brand,
which can then be put at the beginning of the communication campaign.
It is assessed on a 5- or 7-point scale from absolutely disagreeable to completely agreeable.
The typical number of constructs can be from 10 to 20,
and these constructs represent certain associations.
For example, this is my brand, this is a brand for me, this is a home brand, this is a brand for my family,
or this is a brand of a snob, this is a brand of a person who demonstrates his position in society, and so on.
That is, this pool of answers can be spread to 10-20 options.
Of course, such a question requires time and, most importantly, attention of the respondents.
In this case, interviewers help them answer these questions.
These questions, it is meant, distract from a negative perception,
so that the respondent still filled out the questionnaire to the end.
Such information becomes very important for the subsequent creation of an advertising concept and an advertising campaign,
because such associations can be put at the beginning of the advertising message on the promotion of this brand,
or in the very concept of creating a brand communication with the consumer.
The last type of questions is semi-structured, I have already talked about this.
It is necessary to focus on typical constructs of questions in order to find out the situation with the respondent.
We call them questions about the respondents themselves, or questions about respondents.
Questions about age. It is better to ask about the age interval, we have already mentioned this in today's lecture.
The interval should be compared with a certain age of the target segment of the study.
When I told you about the target segment of mayonnaise consumers from 25 to 55 years,
nevertheless, behavior and, most importantly, preferences of age groups that are included in this target segment differ.
Therefore, demographic questions about age should be asked,
taking into account the variations in behavior of women of different ages.
For example, 25-35 years old usually demonstrate an aspiration to maintain athletic shape, health, and so on.
They demonstrate an aspiration to lighter mayonnaise without cholesterol, with less fat, or based on the use of vegetable oil, and so on.
Questions about income. There are several approaches to asking questions about the income of respondents.
It can be a direct question with the use of the interval, and at the same time, it is necessary to take into account
that the respondent must clearly understand what they want from him.
They want to know about his individual monthly income, or the total income of the family per month or per year,
or the household in which this respondent lives.
In any case, certain income intervals should be set.
It all depends on the average income level and the maximum possible income for the respondents,
who represent the target audience of a particular product.
If we talk about various indirect questions that can be asked to determine the level of the income of the respondent,
then you can ask a question, or ask about the intention to purchase a high-value product.
For example, do you plan to purchase an apartment or a country cottage next year?
Or, as I said, there is an indirect classification of income levels for various levels of respondents.
This classification comes from the upper limit, the upper bar, I can afford to buy everything except real estate,
or including real estate, the next rank, I can afford to buy everything, not including real estate.
And the lower bar, I have enough money only for food, or I can hardly find money only for food.
The classification of questionnaire questions, behavioral characteristics of the questionnaire,
factual information about who the respondent is.
For example, this information can be used to determine the size of the market,
to determine the share of the product in the market,
awareness of the product and its wide use by individual respondents,
questions about determining relationships, what the respondent thinks about a particular item,
about the product, about the product's quality, ratings, reasons for actions,
determining the image of the study, classification questions.
These are the most interesting questions in marketing studies,
because they give the opportunity to get information to divide respondents into groups.
Even those respondents we interviewed, regardless of whether we collected 150 or 1050 questionnaire questions,
they can be used in all types of surveys.
The typical structure of the questionnaire.
First of all, it should be said that the questionnaire for phone examination or for personal survey
should be divided into four components.
The beginning of the questionnaire, then the following several questions that are of warming nature,
then the questions that in English were called the main part of the questionnaire,
or the body of the questionnaire, up to the end of the main part,
and finally, the final part of the questionnaire, where the personal questions about respondents are included.
This topic will be unfinished if we do not consider the possibility of measuring information
in marketing studies, because the design of the questionnaire questions and the design of the questionnaire in general
is directly related to the methods of statistics or analysis that will be used to measure the statements of respondents.
If we talk about conducting questionnaire surveys and designing a competent questionnaire,
we remember that a questionnaire is a set of logical, structured questions or survey.
We say that, especially in closed questions, various scales are used,
which allow to measure quantitatively the results of the examination,
the results of the respondents' answers to certain questions,
that is, the results of the respondents' choice of certain answers to certain questions.
For example, I told you several times that you can use such a design as a scale from 0 to 5,
or from 1 to 5, or from 0 to 7, or from 1 to 7,
which, if you consider it in more detail, means 0 or 1,
that is, the smallest value of this scale means absolutely disagreeable,
and 5 or 7 means absolutely agreeable to the statement presented in the answer.
These scales or these possibilities are called measurements,
or measurements are defined as a number of measures or density of a certain characteristic,
which is of interest to the study.
For example, the study of a characteristic that means the preference or rejection of a statement,
or self-updating of oneself as a representative of the middle class,
that is, a representative of a cohort of the population that has a higher education,
has a career, some steps of this career,
implements his own business, is the owner of a business,
or is a manager of a middle and higher rank,
and has a certain level of income, which, of course, varies from where this representative lives and works.
Thus, measurements are a procedure for comparing objects by certain characteristics or signs.
For example, you can measure the temperature in this audience,
and a scale will be taken as the basis of the measurement.
The most common in our situation is the Celsius scale, from 0 to 100 degrees,
where the freezing point of water, which was taken at the beginning of the measurement,
is understood as a zero point, and 100 degrees is the boiling point of water.
Another scale, which is also widely used, especially in North America, for temperature measurements,
has a completely different character, and a completely different statistical procedure is embedded in it,
the Fahrenheit scale, where the zero point does not mean the freezing point of water at all,
because all scales have a certain relative character, relative to either the beginning or some object.
And in the Fahrenheit scale, completely different features of the statistical procedure for measuring objects will be embedded.
There is a scale for measuring the hardness of MOAS objects.
Hardness measurements of objects, for example, in particular, of precious stones or the weight of precious stones,
you know that this scale implies a unit of measurement called the Carat.
There is a scale for measuring, for example, the oscillations of the Earth,
especially for seismic-dangerous regions, or a scale for measuring the speed of the wind,
or the size of the waves, the oscillations of the world ocean, and so on.
But we will not talk about this, we will not talk about temperature measurements,
we will talk about the measurable features or indicators that are used in marketing research
to determine objects of some, for example, consumers, or brands of products, shops, advertisements, preferences of consumers, and so on.
As indicators and comparisons of objects, some spatial, temporal, physical, physiological, sociological, psychological, or other features and characteristics of the product are used.
We say that measurements can be made using various scales.
Why am I talking about scales and why does it immediately correspond to the design of surveys?
Because scales are a component of surveys, especially questions that are closed.
Four characteristics of comparative scales, comparative with some object.
It can be an ideal object or a comparison of objects between themselves.
It can be a description, order, distance, and the presence of the starting point.
I just told you about the presence of the starting point.
In Celsius, at the starting point of temperature measurement, there was a freezing point,
and the final point, if we take as a basis this object, was the boiling point of water.
Now about different types of scales.
Scaling can be based on the order of empirical properties, which are some kind of scale estimates.
I repeat that a consumer can be offered to build his own arrangement from the number of brands he knows,
or his own order of listing of these brands, the first ones that come to his mind.
For example, the brands of toothpaste that he knows, that he uses, or that he plans to buy.
If we conduct such an experiment now, I am sure that 90% of the listeners who are here now
under the number one brand will call Colgate, which naturally created this image, this brand,
with the help of various marketing communications.
This does not mean at all that you are all its consumers.
Maybe this knowledge and this choice are based only on the brand's knowledge.
But in fact, at home you use another brand and another manufacturer.
When we talk about scaling or measurements, we always remember two indicators.
As in the indicators of quantity, the quantity, mass, state of matter, object or system
that exist in the form of order, listing, a multitude of qualities.
And the qualities that denote the essential properties of the object.
We can measure both.
We can measure the number of brands that exist, or we can measure the quality characteristics,
attributes of these brands.
For example, the Colgate brand is widely known, and at the same time we cannot say that this brand is for me.
Because we use the brand Locolut, for example,
which has a positioning that it is sold in a limited distribution channel only through pharmaceutical systems.
In the next two slides, you can see the main characteristics of four comparative scales.
There are four of them in total.
Nominal, order, comparative and interval scale.
And the main examples from marketing or examples from various types of statistics
that can be used for the analysis of answers.
Nominal scale.
When correspondents are offered to list some objects.
It can be a number of a book.
This does not mean that a student with the number of a book number one will be considered the first in the rating.
Because it demonstrates the best success in study.
When we analyze this scale, various methods of descriptive statistics can be used.
Such as percentage ratios or the most frequently repeated meaning of the fashion.
We are not talking about fashion, but about fashion as a statistical value.
The most frequently repeated meaning.
I repeat, if I ask you to raise your hands of those students who will be called the number one brand in the category of toothpaste by Colgate,
and most of them will remain, then we will calculate how often this meaning is repeated from the total number of participants.
And if we talk about deductive statistics, then the X-square criterion is used,
which is possible for the analysis of the purity of the repetition of the mention of this brand or the knowledge of this brand, and so on.
The next comparative scale, which refers to the methods of scaling, is called the order scale.
Here, the numbers mean the relative positions, but not the amount of differences between them.
For example, the quality levels, the team levels in the tournament, or the ranging of preferences or market positions of a certain brand from the point of view of the consumer.
For example, the respondents are offered a list of brands or products, and it is proposed to arrange the ranks of which product or brand will be preferable from the point of view of a particular respondent,
which will be in the second place, which will be in the third, from the point of view of mentions or the possibility of use, and so on.
Here, the percentages or the possibility of determining the percentage ratio of the number of mentions or the presentation of this brand or another brand,
number one or number two, from the point of view of descriptive statistics, and from the point of view of deductive statistics, dispersion analysis or rank correlation are used.
We do not say that there will be an equal distance between these categories, number one and number two.
We do not know about this, and this is not included in the measurement.
We say that from the point of view of consumers, if they do not see this brand, which they call number one, they can purchase a substitute product or a brand that their competitors produce.
The next scale is the interval scale. Here we are talking about the difference between objects that are compared, and the starting point of the report is chosen arbitrarily.
For example, the temperature that is measured on the Fahrenheit scale. There is no starting point that would correspond to some characteristic of the object.
Here, in the interval scales, we can measure the attitude of consumers, some coefficients, for example, enter coefficients of importance, the significance of some rank,
according to which consumers evaluate their attitude to a particular characteristic of a product or brand.
For example, if we talk about personal computers, we are talking about portable personal computers, laptops.
When I choose my personal computer, I say that the most important characteristic for me, in addition to technological properties, in addition to memory and the ability to install a certain set of programs into this computer,
the most important characteristic after that is its weight and size, because I carry it with me very often.
For professionals, such a characteristic, and for men, such a characteristic will not be the most important.
For young people from another segment, in the third or first place in terms of significance, and in this case we must clearly know what coefficient of significance to enter in this case,
may be the color of this computer. And note that many manufacturers, including my respected Sony, in response to these market requirements, began to produce computers of different colors in order to offer them to different consumers.
And, in the end, the relative scale, the starting point of something is fixed, as in the Celsius scale.
Coefficients can be calculated according to this scale, for example, length, width are examples.
The starting point is the point where you stand. The width of this room or its length can be measured from both angles.
There is a fixed starting point. Age, of course, has a zero starting point. Income can have a zero starting point.
Expenses, sales volume, market share, the same thing. From zero to, for example, 50-70%, as some manufacturers of mobile phones and cellular phone declare.
In this case, statistics methods are used, which are called the average geometric or average harmonic, which allow to smooth out these coefficients and variations.
If we talk about other scales that allow to measure the attitude and emotions of consumers in contrast to these purely statistical and mathematical scales,
they are called incomparable scales and they have the nature of so-called detailed rating scales.
Pay attention to the comparison of scaling methods in the next slide. There are only three such scales, the most common, although there are some configurations of these scales,
based on which there are the three basic scales presented on this slide.
The scale named after the creator of Leikert, the semantic differential of Charles Osgood and the stepel scale.
These are different configurations of scales for measuring the attitude of respondents to a particular object that is being studied.
If we talk about the methods of incomparable scaling in order to measure the attitude and emotions of respondents, for example, in the studies called A&U, Attitudes and Usage Research,
that is, the study of the attitude and use of products or services. Detailed rating scales contain numbers and their brief description,
so that the respondent who answers the question becomes immediately clear how he evaluates this characteristic or this object.
The Leikert scale, for example, serves to measure the attitude and contains the degree of agreement from 1 to 5, absolutely disagreeable.
Sometimes this scale can be extended to 7 or 9, but in Russian it is quite difficult to describe these intermediate characteristics,
because there will be not enough words, or somewhere there will be a transition through an absolutely indifferent neutral attitude.
Although, different kinds of scales are used in different markets. In Russia, the 5-point scale is most often used, as we were evaluated at school or in institutes.
In Europe, the 7-point scale is in high esteem, and in the United States, America, at least 9.
But in English there are more opportunities for a very brief description of these intermediate values in this scale.
The Osgoode semantic differential is a scale that is used for image analysis, for positioning analysis, and, among other things, for profile analysis of segments.
The 5-7-point scale has so-called bipolar marks. Bipolar marks are antonyms, words that reflect the characteristics of the object, from negative to positive.
For example, the menu of a restaurant, how it can be, is it extensive, wide, or very limited. Limited in this case has a negative connotation,
and a wide menu means that the consumer has the opportunity to choose. Or the location of the restaurant, again, as in the case of Univermag, central, not far from the subway or some shopping malls, or peripheral.
This means that this restaurant has a peripheral meaning and is located somewhere in the sleeping area. And the last scale, the Staple scale, the unipolar, most often the 10-point scale, without the starting point, serves to measure the relationship of images.
Why is it called unipolar? Because it goes from a negative assessment to a positive assessment. Please look at this slide. This slide is borrowed from the book by Nere Shomolhotri, Marketing Research, Practical Guidance.
This slide shows the use of semantic differential to measure the perception of people or some products. And based on the analysis of the number of responses of respondents, so-called comparative snake-like diagrams are made, which reflect a certain comparison of images.
In the case of analysis of an object that provides services, for example, a high school that offers MBA programs compares itself to its competitor.
In this case, there will be, for example, a convenient and inconvenient location, and then the characteristics of people who work and who are inextricably linked with the provision of educational services.
And what kind of people, what kind of teachers or specialists who work and meet with students, with consumers, are rude or refined, inconvenient or convenient, dominant, secondary, and so on.
Two objects are compared. One object, its characteristics, its profile, is marked with a dark graph, a snake-like diagram. The other object is marked with a red graph.
An example of the Likert scale. I like to solve crosswords. From 1 to 5, I do not agree or completely disagree, I agree. An example of the Staple scale. Please evaluate how accurately the word or phrase describes the research of my university of magic.
To evaluate the opinions of respondents, whose opinion is very important, but it is even more difficult to attract their attention than the attention of a highly profitable audience. These are children.
In this case, their opinion is very important to us, because they are, if not buyers, then consumers of products and services of some, and users of this product, and can influence the decision-making on the acquisition.
But in order to interest them, you can use some unique configurations of rating scales. For example, the thermometer scale. Determine how much you like the McDonald's product.
And paint the image of the thermometer to a mark that best reflects your attitude. By the way, here the scale from 0 to 100 is used. I don't like it at all in the 0 area, and I really like it in the 100 area.
Or the smiley faces scale. Determine how much you like the Barbie doll, indicating the expression of the face that best reflects your attitude. If you don't like the doll, point to the face 1.
If you like it very much, then face 5. Note that the face here is the widest smile, and face 1 is the tips of the lips lowered down. This means that the person does not like or is not satisfied with the product offered to him.
I can tell you that the examples of these questions are taken from the student projects that our students conducted for the marketing research projects. In particular, the last question from the questionnaire, which was compiled at the request of the Motel company here in Russia.
We move on to the next topic, which is called the election survey. What number of respondents must be interviewed, and the size of the election and, most importantly, the method of selecting respondents from the general general summary in order to reduce the percentage of uncertainty and the probability of obtaining invalid, unrepresentative data.
After we decided that we were conducting a quantitative survey, when we decided and compiled a questionnaire to obtain primary data from respondents, the next decision that must be made is to determine who and how many respondents we will interview.
The question is, what is the general summary of the target audience, which is oriented to our product or service. In order to get you up to date, it is necessary to first focus on the main definitions. What is the general summary or Population?
The summary of all the elements that have a number of common characteristics and which covers a complete set of elements in terms of the problem of marketing research. I repeat that marketing research in the election surveys, in the principles of conducting election surveys, uses methods of sociological research, but the goals of marketing research are different.
The goals of marketing research are to study the attitude, perception, use, lifestyle of respondents, etc. The use of products or services, etc. Thus, the general summary can be understood by the entire population, which prefers or is the target audience of a specific type of products or services.
For example, the educational service that offers a program of marketing retraining will be oriented not to the entire population of the country or Moscow or some specific region, but will be oriented only to people who have a higher education and who, of course, mainly work in the field of marketing or want to change their orientation to professional marketing.
There are other important definitions that must be remembered when studying the topic of election surveys. The census is a complete list of elements of the general summary.
You know, the census conducted by the State Statistics Committee of the Russian Federation, the last census was in 2002, and the previous census was held in the Soviet Union in 1989.
You can imagine how expensive it was to participate in this census, if each element of the selected summary, excluding infants who cannot answer for themselves, took part in this census.
A priori, the number of market subjects is always limited, and you can ask almost any market participant. The selection or sample for many elements of the general summary is selected for participation in the survey.
The basis of the sample frame is the list of elements from which the sample will be produced. For example, it can be the territorial units of Moscow or its separate regions, organizations that are being examined, for example, high school students or high school graduates who will take the entrance exams at the university tomorrow or in a few other days.
And some other elements can be the basis of the selection.
The selection process is considered possible in higher educational institutions this year. As in many marketing studies, this process is quite logical and each step flows from one to another and is interconnected.
At the first stage, the general summary is determined, then the basis of the selection is determined, for example, high school graduates of Moscow.
Then the method of selection is determined, how we will survey them, where we will survey them, whether we will survey them near the institutes, for example, at the moment when they submit documents or when they are in line for passing through the examination commission for the exam.
Or other methods of achieving the units of selection will be used, that is, the achievement and stimulation of individual respondents, who represent the units of selection.
Then the volume is determined, how many respondents are needed and enough, surveyed in order to ensure that their data can be extrapolated to the entire general summary and, in the end, conduct the examination itself.
The average volumes of selection in marketing studies. I really like this slide and I draw your attention to it.
I repeat that this slide is borrowed from the book by Nere Shomal Khotry, who has a lot of experience in conducting consultative and marketing studies.
But most importantly, he collected information in this textbook about the typical volumes of selection, in particular.
For example, if we talk about research aimed at determining the potential or capacity of the market, determining the problem, the minimum volume of respondents is 500 respondents, 500 surveys, the usual range is from 1000 to 2500.
Please note that these numbers are not so large, because if you meet or order a study, it seems to you that the more selection, the more respondents are surveyed, the more reliable the results will be.
In fact, the number of respondents or the number of processed information does not mean the quality of the information received.
In the case of a selection based on statistics or a quantitative or certified approach, it will be enough to survey from 500 to 1000 people.
And it will be possible to indicate with reliability or accuracy up to a certain percentage that this information can be extrapolated to the entire general population.
Research on price determination to solve the problem, for example, on the operational level, from 300 to 500 respondents, the usual range, the minimum number is 200 respondents.
Considering that some surveys may be defective, incorrectly filled or not fully filled, 200 must be taken for the minimum, that is, it is necessary to fill 200, but they must be accurately filled.
Testing of the product, the same volume, trial marketing, the same volume, evaluation of television, radio, print and advertising for one advertising ad to determine its effectiveness.
The minimum volume is only 150 surveys. Again, these surveys must be correctly filled. The usual range is from 200 to 300 surveys to reduce the degree of uncertainty and the risk of incorrect filling of surveys by respondents.
The audit on the trial market is 10 shops or 10-20 shops for the minimum volume.
The average age of the shop is over 30 years. Why is this age bar taken as a basis? Because by this period, sociologists and marketers believe that consumers are leading an independent lifestyle, many of them have a family, have higher education, often receive a second higher education, and in this respect their consumption structure of various products and services changes.
That is why such consumers are called consumers in the active consumer age.
The classification of selection methods. Statistics say that people can be selected. If we put certain statistical procedures in it, we use the so-called random or probability approach.
The random approach is the first method of selection, or the so-called determined, not random approach, based on which the opinion of the researcher is most often based.
I will start with the determined approach. There are four types of selection methods that are used very often, but for each of them they have a non-representative nature, and each of them must be proven to the customer.
The convenience sampling method, the judgmental sampling method, the quota sampling method, where certain quotas or classes of consumers are determined according to certain criteria that must be examined.
Then the approximate ratio of such quotas is determined in the general summary, and the decision is made as to what percentage of the representatives of a given quota should be included in the total selection.
The second method of determining the selection procedure is the random method.
This is when the concept is laid down that each unit of the general summary has an equal chance of being selected. Let's imagine the following situation, the following picture.
Let's say there are 50 people in this audience. If we make a list of these respondents, each of them will be assigned a number, as in the game of the lotto.
The student sitting on the left in the first row will have number 1, the student sitting on the right in the last row will have number 50.
And everyone else will have a number that will be dropped into a special drum or a special basket, where the researcher will accidentally get the numbers.
We need to distribute the information, the opinion of the general summary of all students, for example, on the subject of evaluating the quality of the lecture. It is enough to ask only 10-15 people.
The researcher will take out the numbers of the respondents assigned to the participants of our class from the basket, from the hat, from the bag, and will get 10 or 15 numbers from there.
In principle, everyone has an equal chance of being selected, and at the same time no one knows whose number our researcher will get, because the principle of lotto is used, the principle of random selection is used.
So, the probability random methods are simple random selection, which I told a little about. Each unit of the set has an equal chance of being selected.
The systematic one, that is, a certain step is laid down. For example, we assign units of numbers to the respondents, but at the same time we do not drop them into the hat or into the bag.
We say that we will interview every third student, and then we will also get 15 respondents out of 50, but at the same time we laid down a step of 3 units.
Stratified selection is a selection that is a two-step process. The first step is to divide the whole set into layers or strata, which can intersect with each other or not.
Then we use a simple random approach to interview the same number of respondents from different layers. For example, this year, high school graduates graduated from a school with various biases.
These are mathematical biases, or humanitarian, or economic biases. And all of them intend to continue their education in higher education institutions. We say that these strata intersect with each other, because despite the fact that there were certain biases in the education of these students, nevertheless, in the main general education subjects, their knowledge and strata intersect.
But knowing or assuming that the graduates of physics and mathematics schools will go to technical faculties or technical faculties of universities, and the humanitarians and economists will go to the faculty of psychology or some other humanities faculties and institutes,
you can compare the number of places in these universities with the number of graduates and decide which number of each layer should be chosen by a simple random selection method.
The next selection method differs from the stratified one, and it is called cluster selection. Clusters are selections or layers that do not intersect with each other. For example, the level of education or the level of approaches to the graduates, to the assessment of the graduates, the quality of training of graduates in Moscow or in some different provincial city.
And despite the fact that the general education subjects are approximately the same, nevertheless, the degree of knowledge of foreign languages will be different. Thus, from the point of view of approaches to the study of foreign languages, these clusters will not intersect with each other.
Graduates of capital schools will definitely go to the classes because they realize the importance of the knowledge of foreign languages as a tool for future work, for future careers.
We will use the stratified selection method, when layers are used or strata are determined on the level of income or on the social position of respondents, whose consumer behavior differs, and quotas from a determined complex of selection surveys.
Statistically, we will assume that the number of respondents with an income level starting from $ 1,000 per family member will be located geographically in Moscow.
But with the development of geography and distribution throughout the country, this level of income will fall, and, accordingly, the number of respondents related to this part of the target audience will fall.
The volume of selection is the number of elements that need to be studied. Why did we say that it is enough to study 10-15 people from the general audience in order to determine how their opinion corresponds to the opinion of the general community?
I have already told you that the determined or not random non-probability method of selection does not allow you to objectively assess the accuracy of the results of the study. I will give one example.
The convenience method. Selection is created from the elements that are convenient for selection. For example, I have already told you that we decide that it is easiest to get applicants in front of the doors of different universities.
But at the same time, we will not have a complete picture, because it is easiest to come to the doors of the Plekhanov Academy, which is located near the Serpukhovskaya metro station, in the pedestrian vicinity of the Serpukhovskaya metro station, than to go to the Institute of Culture, which is located geographically in the city of Khimki, the Moscow region.
In this case, we will not understand the difference in preferences, as well as in the assessment of the image of a particular university. Because the selection is made up only of applicants who enter the Plekhanov Academy.
The superficial judgmental selection. The elements of the set are selected based on the judge's judgment. That is, the interviewer decides how many girls and boys should be interviewed from the number of graduates of the schools.
And it is estimated that, for example, out of 150 or 200 people, 60% of girls should be interviewed, because girls always know more, despite the statistical distribution. And 40% of boys should be interviewed. It is quite possible that this judgment of the investigator is not correct.
I have already mentioned the quota selection. The two-stage superficial selection. At the first stage, control groups or general quota are created. And at the second stage, elements of the set are selected based on convenience. For example, students conduct research on their relationship to magazines that are published and see their target audience of teenagers.
And students say that they understand that it is necessary to interview schoolchildren of different ages. Because the teenage age is long, starting from 13 to 19. But the behavior of 13-year-olds is significantly different from the behavior of 19-year-olds.
That is why it is necessary to interview schoolchildren of 6th and 7th grades of high school, 9th and 11th grades of high school and high school graduates. But the students have only one possibility to conduct this research.
They have to explain to the students that all schools are closed, there is no access to students for third-party observers. That is why students establish contacts with schools where they graduated in order to ensure the convenience of behavior.
The last stage is the snow-comb selection. The initial group of respondents is randomly selected. And then they are asked which of the other respondents they know or friends. They can recommend to participate in the survey.
It is clear that it is quite easy to collect the number of such respondents. And at the same time, the selection is shifted to the number of people who share more or less the same views. And so there is not enough variety of information.
Another method of selecting is statistical. As I said, the number of people chosen is random, according to the law of random selection, which ensures representativeness with a known or specified share of probability.
For example, you want to calculate the number of respondents to be surveyed. Before you decide or ask yourself this question, you must ask the statistician or researcher what share of probability or what share of acceptance is taken into account in determining the size of the selection.
The probability method is made up of four basic approaches to selecting. The first is random selection. Each element of the general set has an equal and known probability of being selected.
The second approach is systematic selection. The method is set up by a starting point, and then each element is selected from the selection base.
As I said in our example, we can set a certain step from 50 people present at our lecture. Let's say 3. 3 is a unit that will be added to each previous unit of selection.
The first element will be a participant number 1, plus 3 is number 4, plus 3 is number 7, and so on, until we select 15 elements to survey them.
Stratified selection is a two-step method, in which the general set is divided into layers that can intersect. For example, graduates of schools with different bias, as I said.
And then the elements are selected from each layer based on a simple random selection. That is, each element of this layer, each element of the set from this layer has an equal and known chance of being selected.
The variety of stratified selection is route-based. That is, a route is drawn for an interviewer in a region, such as Moscow, which was once called Sevastopol.
A street is chosen, which consists of a number of residential buildings, in order to interview respondents living in this area.
For example, Bolotnaya Street. There is a street in the former Sevastopol region, not far from the metro station Khimovsky Prospect.
The interviewer is given a step, a layer, that on Bolotnaya Street you need to interview 10 respondents, on a street called Fruktova, which is not far from the metro station, and is also a street that belongs to the former Sevastopol region, you need to interview 10 people.
And in some other area, where there are mostly offices and fewer residential buildings, you need to interview 5 people who live in this area.
Cluster selection differs from stratified by the fact that this is also a two-stage approach, when at first the set is divided into mutually excluding and mutually supplementing subgroups, clusters, for example, residents who live in different regions.
Moscow and Moscow region, their consumer behavior will differ, in particular, what stores they mainly prefer.
Then, elements of the set are selected from these clusters, which are selected using a simple random selection, based on some knowledge, data, about the consumption of a particular product or visiting a particular shopping center.
Further, after determining the methods of random selection, it is necessary to think about how to calculate the size of the selection, how many respondents are needed and enough to ask in order to prove to the customer of the study that the information obtained using the selection method is representative and reflects the real position of things.
Moreover, this information can be extrapolated or distributed to the entire general set, which was not surveyed, but was surveyed only by its representatives, some number of its representatives.
For this purpose, you can work with a table of simple random numbers. Of the total of 300 units numbered in advance, 7 units of observation must be selected, and n is a large three-digit number, and the table gives five-digit numbers.
We will use only the last numbers from this table. For example, 7 units of the end of each number by the number 7. 97, 297, 209, 13, 157. These are the numbers of observation that fall into the selected selection.
The most common task is to evaluate the average value of the signs of the general set, which is evaluated, for example, we need to determine the average number of newspapers and magazines that are issued by business school employees or institute employees.
The basis of the selection is a list of all units of selection, all employees of the institute or business school. Alphabetical list, which is numbered in sequence. Number 1 is the name of the person who starts with the letter A, and the number of some of the employees who start with the letter Y.
The calculation of the characteristics of a simple random selection. We have 50 units of the general set, the number of newspapers that are issued, which is characteristic of each of these numbers.
The basis of the selection is 50 units. The number of newspapers that are issued, when we multiply and add up the numbers, will be 150 newspapers and magazines, which are issued by newspaper employees.
If we talk about the number of newspapers and magazines that are issued per subscriber, then by simply dividing 150 newspapers by 50, the person in the selection receives an arithmetic value of 3.
In this case, we have a certain concept of variation that characterizes the magnitude of similarity or inlikeliness of answers to a certain question. For example, someone does not issue newspapers at all, and someone issues 3 magazines, and someone issues only one.
As a measure of variation, the average square deviation is taken, in our case, 1.7. The definition of the investigated quantities for the totality is determined on the basis of the selection statistics.
Therefore, we should establish a range or a certain confidence interval in which the value of the square deviation will fall. What is a confidence interval? How is it related to the concept of reliability or the level of reliability?
A confidence interval is a range in which the true value of the studied parameter of the total is determined, given the level of reliability. For example, a range, the extreme point of which corresponds to a certain percentage of certain answers to a question.
For example, out of 50 people, 10% report that they do not issue newspapers at all, and 15% report that they issue an average of 3 newspapers and magazines.
The confidence interval corresponds to 95 or 99%. What does 95% mean? It means that with an accuracy of plus or minus 5, we can say that the number of respondents we are interviewing will give us knowledge that can be distributed to the entire general population.
If we use a 99% confidence interval, it means that the number of respondents with an accuracy of plus or minus 1, their opinion and knowledge will be distributed to the entire general population.
Where can we find the correlation of the probability integral of this confidence interval? The numbers 1.96 and 2.58 for a 99% confidence interval are denoted as Z.
In our workbook, in the conspective, or in any other textbook on sociological or marketing research, there are tables that are called the probability integral values for determining the Z value for various confidence intervals.
I repeat that the standard confidence intervals are 95% plus or minus 5, with an accuracy of plus or minus 5. We decide that our information and our choice, the opinion of this choice, is distributed to the entire general population, or 99%.
If we talk about the optimal size of the choice, there are many different formulas, but the most common and widely used formula, in which the indicators of the dispersion of the sign are used and taken into account, or the expected average deviation of the results from the expected average value,
n is the expected value of the Z choice, the level of reliability coefficient, in this case we round 1.96 or 2. 1.96 is rounded to 2 for a 95% confidence interval, and 3 instead of 2.58 for a 0.99 confidence interval.
The indicator d means the level of reliability. Let's consider this choice, the calculation of the optimal size of the choice, for example. Let's say we study the behavior of the buyer in a grocery store. In particular, it is necessary to determine the average amount of the check.
The shop owner, who is in this case, as an expert, says that the average amount of the check can be about 500-700 rubles, and the average deviation or sigma can be 200 rubles. This means that the average deviation from 700 or 500 rubles can be 200 rubles.
During the survey, it would be desirable to determine the average value with an accuracy of d, with an accuracy of up to 20 rubles at the level of Z reliability at 0.95.
The formula for the optimal size of the choice is the product of the squares of the degree of reliability to the degree of the integral value of the probability in the square divided by the square of the value of reliability.
n is the primary volume of the choice, sigma is the dispersion of the sign, the expected average deviation of the obtained results, z is the coefficient of the level of reliability. I repeat that we round 1.96 to 2 and 2.58 for 3.
We get 40,000 multiplied by 4. 40,000 is the value of the number of dispersions of the sign, multiplied by 4. 2 in the square divided by 400 is 400.
That is, it is necessary and sufficient to ask 400 buyers. But we take into account that some surveys may be distorted or spoiled by the interviewer or the respondent himself, so it is desirable to increase the number of respondents to 420-450 surveys.
If we wanted to find out the average amount of the check with an accuracy of up to 10 rubles, we would have to ask 1,600 buyers. If we wanted to get a level of reliability not at 0.95, but at 0.99, the number of buyers to be asked would be 3,500.
If we were satisfied with an accuracy of plus or minus 50 rubles, it would be enough to ask only 65 people in the given conditions. Note that 65 people, based on the concept of a random approach, is not enough.
1,600 or 3,500 people are not enough to be asked, because such volumes of the selection examination will take time and, most importantly, will be expensive. That is why we will stop at the number that means 400 people.
How is this done in practice? It is believed that surveys of 30-50 representatives of a specific narrow audience, for example, married Muscovites aged 30-45, who have one child, higher education and total income within 700-1,500 dollars per month, can be distributed to the entire group, and the permissible error or trust interval will not exceed 4% at a level of reliability of 0.95%.
Thus, 30-50 people are enough to spread this opinion to the entire general community, that is, married Muscovites of a certain age, working and living in Moscow.
If the research is aimed at obtaining information on the opinions, knowledge, behavior, attitude to a certain problem of all Muscovites, it is necessary to build a selection in which all narrow groups of strata would be represented.
We talked about stratified selection. For example, two strata on the family situation, married or not married, three on the presence and number of children, three adult, three income, two educational, a total of 108 groups or strata, each of which should have at least 30 respondents, a total of more than 3,000 respondents.
However, if you take into account the concept of a selection survey, it is enough to deal with a volume of 400-600 respondents, and then to carry out a so-called dual-factor analysis of the influence of age, education, income, family situation.
At the same time, the selection is divided into 2-3 groups, each of which has at least 100-150 respondents. An example that I borrowed from the book by Igor Berezin.
Representative selection of the population of Russia. 3,600-9,000 people and 180 groups of strata, 2 sexes, 3 ages, 2 educational levels, 3 income groups, 5 types of settlements in which respondents live.
The trust interval will be within the range of plus or minus 3 percentage points. This means that if 30%, that is, from 12% to 45% of respondents, stated that they regularly consume mayonnaise, then the share of mayonnaise consumers in Russia can be estimated at 27-33%.
Or to consider that 9-15% of 3% or 42-48% of 5% consume mayonnaise in Russia.
If we talk about conducting marketing research, it is important to remember that the size of the selection does not depend on the size of the overall population. For example, in a metropolis with a population of 1 million people or in a rural city of 35,000 people, when constructing a selection, representative by the same number of parameters, it is necessary to ask for the same number of people.
And to achieve representativeness by 5 parameters, sex, age, income, education in the field of professional activity, it is possible only in the selection of 1,000-1,200 people in one settlement, regardless of the number of people living in this settlement.
I propose to answer the question. If you are a representative of the Lyubidyan company, a juice producer, and you need to survey the population of cities with a population of more than 100,000 people, what type of survey should be used to obtain information about 1,000-1,200 people in each city?
As I said, experimental studies are carried out at the most advanced stages, which, based on their essence, use the cause-effect relationship.
The cause-effect relationship means that the X event increases the Y event, and there is a cause-effect relationship between them. For example, increasing the cost of a product by 10% affects the sales volume.
This is often negatively influenced. On the contrary, a 10% discount increases sales. At the same time, we say that such discounts and such experiments are not typical for all products.
A 10% discount will be perceived skeptically by consumers of the luxury category, or a 10% discount will seem too low for the sale of the previous fashion collection.
The condition for the existence of a cause-effect relationship, which requires that the degree of joint advance or joint variation of the X event and the Y event, is recognized by the initial hypothesis of the existence of a cause-effect relationship, about the relationship between these events.
For example, the initial hypothesis can be the hypothesis formulated as follows for conducting experimental studies.
Tactile or grafting information obtained through the grafting organs, through the organs of the subject's testing, can increase sales via the Internet and catalogs.
Tactile information can increase sales via the Internet by 15%, and tactile information will not affect sales via the Internet at all.
I mean if the product is presented on the Internet or in the catalog. That is, there is a presence of the product in the unprocessed trade when there are no consumers, a seller who can tell about our product.
For example, a mobile phone. How easy will this product be sold and how much will its sales increase if the seller or manufacturer, in addition to technical characteristics, adds an emotional characteristic of describing this product from the point of view of obtaining tactile information from consumers.
For example, that the phone is easy to put in your hand, that it has a very pleasant and high-quality material that warms or cools the hand of the owner of this mobile phone in the coolness, and so on.
In addition to technical characteristics, such emotional attributes can become extremely important in unprocessed sales.
For example, we can catch the corresponding variation between the purchase of fashionable clothes and the level of education. Pay attention to this slide and the slide that follows it.
The purchase of fashionable clothes may depend on the level of education, higher and middle, and the purchase of fashionable clothes, high and low, means a high degree of purchase variation and a low degree of purchase variation.
However, we do not see a difference between the influence of the income level of a person who has a high or middle education, the influence on his behavior in the process of buying fashionable clothes, which can be identified by experimental studies.
For example, the purchase of fashionable clothes, the following slide, and the ratio of the indicators of the level of income and education and its influence on the purchase of fashionable clothes.
In the first case, we see that people with higher education, 61% of the respondents, and with a high income level are more likely to purchase fashionable clothes than respondents with the same level of education, but with lower incomes.
The main definitions of the units of observation that are included in the experimental study are people, organizations, individual consumers, or other observable objects whose reaction to independent factors is to be studied.
Experimental studies have come to marketing from fundamental studies, where they are often used to study the influence of pharmaceutical drugs on the health of subjects.
The experiment is primarily a controlled process of changing one or more independent variables to measure their influence on one or more dependent variables, provided that the influence of third-party factors is excluded.
Please note that we introduce the concept of marketing, including or providing a 10% discount to a particular consumer on a particular type of product.
Or some other factors, such as the case factor or the place factor, can have a strong influence on decision-making.
Thus, experimental studies in marketing are carried out either in natural conditions, where the consumer and the product or the consumer and the service meet, or in laboratory artificial conditions, where the situation of natural market conditions is imitated and the consumer is offered to try the product, assess its quality,
to arrange the degree of importance of a particular factor or parameter of the product that affects the consumer's decision to buy.
If we talk about the classification of the model of the experiment, it is in the general form of four groups of experimental studies, which are combined into four large types or clusters.
The first is a preliminary experiment, the second is a real experiment, the third is a pseudo-experiment, and the fourth is a statistical experiment.
For example, a preliminary experiment model is also called a single-time study. The model, in which the basic factor, for example, the condition X, is the only group of observations, and then a single measurement of factors is carried out, a feature called only the subsequent analysis, after only.
For example, phone surveys are conducted with respondents on television programs shown the day before, which include a certain commercial video. As a dependent variable, the ability to remember this video without asking questions is present.
When a statement is made, questions about the content are asked. That is, the respondents who watched the TV program the day before, yesterday, should answer whether they remember or not, or should remember what commercial video they watched.
The problem of reliability in this case is obvious. Either the respondents can not remember the commercial video at all, or there is no basis for comparison with the previous respondents.
The next type of experimental study is a preliminary and final study within one experimental group. It is called One Group Pre-test-Post-test. This is a model of preliminary experiments, in which a unit of observations in an experimental group is measured twice.
Respondents are selected for testing in research centers in different cities of the country. A personal survey is conducted to determine the perception of a particular product. Then they watch a TV video in which the commercial video of this product is included.
After watching, a personal survey is conducted again, and the effectiveness of the test ads is assessed as the difference in the perception of a TV program with an included commercial video in relation to this product without watching the commercial video.
The next type of experimental study is a static group model. This is a preliminary experiment model, which involves the use of two experimental groups of respondents, the main and the control group. Both assess the influence of an independent factor and an independent factor.
Two groups of respondents are selected according to the researcher's opinion. A TV program with a commercial video is shown to only one group of respondents. Then the perception of the product is measured by both the main and the control groups.
The effectiveness of the ad is assessed as the difference between the perception of the control group and the perception of the main group. Or vice versa, if this is a negative expression, the perception of the product or the perception of the ad of the main group to the perception of the control group, which the video was not shown.
The models of an actual experiment are tested by a post-test control group. The experimental group is affected by an independent factor, and the control group is not. Preliminary and final measurements are carried out in both groups.
The first group of respondents fills out a questionnaire to determine their preliminary attitude to the product. Preliminary testing of the attitude to the product is carried out.
Then only the experimental group is shown a commercial video. After that, both groups are asked to fill out a questionnaire to measure their attitude to the product.
If the change in perception of the product under the influence of the commercial video, which was seen by the members of the experimental group, increases, this means that such a video will affect the behavior of the consumers and representatives of the target audience of the product.
The models of an actual experiment are presented in the form of experimental studies, which refer to the concept of 4 groups of Solomon.
The factors that limit the possibility of an experiment are time, costs and the possibility of implementation.
Where are the experimental studies conducted?
Other manufacturers have launched new products. Autumn is the most promising time of the year.
However, the company did not pay attention to this, the product was launched, and due to the fact that the negative results of the experimental studies were not taken into account, the company suffered losses in terms of the failure to meet the planned sales figures.
Thus, the topic of experimental studies is over. Before we proceed to the next topic, I would like to ask you a question about how effective and difficult it is to organize experimental market studies in marketing.
Today we have listened to a lecture on the creation, implementation and analysis of data for a marketing project, which is based on effective management decisions.
We have listened to the topic of the concept of conducting research, determining the problems of marketing research, determining the necessary methods and tools for collecting and analyzing marketing information.
We have listened to the information about how the marketing information system is developed in the company, from which blocks and components it consists, and how it can be used by employees of various management departments of the company to make decisions.
The next topic was the quality research projects, where we considered possible types of quality research, deep interviews, focus groups and indirect methods of quality research, which are called design technologies.
Next, we moved on to the topic of quantitative research, obtaining primary information from respondents on a quantitative scale, where we considered various types and methods of surveys, using various tools for conducting surveys, creating surveys.
Next, we considered the basis of measurements in marketing research, the measurement of relations, emotions, the measurement of factors that affect the behavior of consumers and buyers.
We also considered the basis of qualitative research, from the point of view of determining the methods of selection and from the point of view of determining the volumes of selection that are necessary for collecting information.
We also considered experimental marketing research, for example, how static groups or pseudo-experiments can be used, and finally, we figured out how to present a good, effective report on the conduct of marketing research in writing and in oral form.
As part of today's course, there is a large number of methods and techniques that you will study in future courses, which relate to what specific techniques from the listed ones can be used to assess, for example, the determination of product parameters in order to create a product concept that is most in demand by consumers.
It remains to consider the issue of assessing the sensitivity of consumers to price, at what price consumers will buy or refuse a product offered on the market.
It remains to consider the issue of decision-making in the field of distribution, in order to calculate and determine possible parameters for optimizing transport costs or any other marketing costs for the presentation of products in the distribution channel or in various retail and wholesale trading networks.
I wish you success in further study of marketing research and other disciplines in the field of marketing that will bring you knowledge on how to collect, analyze, interpret information and how to make effective decisions based on this information obtained by conducting marketing research.
All the best!